PEP 676: 'dark mode', documentation, spec update, implementation update (#2239)
python/peps: docs/rendering_system.rst

..
   Author: Adam Turner

>    We can't use :pep:`X` references in this document, as they are relative from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   We can't use :pep:`NNN` references in this document, as they are relative to
```

Did you mean this instead? Also, use a clearer placeholder.

Author: The phrasing is poor. What I was trying to express is that using `:pep:` directives *within the PEPs repo* is special, as to make local builds etc work, we define the PEP url scheme to be relative rather than absolute. These relative links are *from* the content root *to* a PEP, and using one in the `docs` subdirectory doesn't work.

It is a phrasing issue that will entirely go away if hosted on the dev guide!

Hopefully that makes a bit more sense -- I'll make the X -> N change now, but leave the other one to see if there's a way of more cleanly expressing the concept above.

A

Reviewer: > My phrasing was poor. What I was trying to express is that using :pep: directives within the PEPs repo is special, as to make local builds etc work, we define the PEP url scheme to be relative rather than absolute. These relative links are from the content root to a PEP, and using one in the docs subdirectory doesn't work.

Yeah, with some effort, I figured out what you probably meant due to being familiar with the type of issue in question, having run into similar problems myself, but it was pretty unclear and confusing just from the text here, and in general "relative from" isn't really used in this context. Instead, what about:

```
We can't use :pep:`NNN` references in this document, as they use links
relative to the current document, which doesn't work in a subdirectory
like this one.
```

Also, wouldn't a better solution be to make the ``:pep:`NNN``` role assume paths relative to the project root (i.e. the `conf.py` directory of the build) rather than the current document? Or is that not really easily possible (I seem to recall running into troubles with that same issue)

> It is a phrasing issue that will entirely go away if hosted on the dev guide!

To be fair, so will internal links to the PEPs in general :slightly_smiling_face:

Author: > a better solution be to make the :pep: role assume paths relative to the project root

Not possible (as far as I can tell) due to Sphinx and HTML(/reverse proxies/the URI protocol?). Sphinx (Docutils, really) treats the pattern literally as a string that it interpolates with the PEP number, doing no path-like operations to it. We could make it an absolute link with no domain, but that then breaks github pages &c, as they host the PEPs at a subdir as a reverse proxy, not the content root. So for the greatest portability we have to sacrifice using `:pep:` roles in subdirs :( 

A

   the content root.
   We use :doc:`PEP X <../pep-xxxx>` instead.

An Overview of the PEP Rendering System
=======================================

This document provides an overview of the PEP rendering system, as a companion
to :doc:`PEP 676 <../pep-0676>`.

1. Configuration
----------------

> Configuration is held in three files:

Author: I would say "held" as in "the water was held in the bucket". I'll change it to "stored" though.

> Configuration is held in three files:

Reviewer: Yeah, we'd probably say "the water was held in the bucket" rather than "the water was stored in the bucket", but the meaning is slightly distinct ("held" implies the storage was more temporary and in advance of some other disposition, while "stored" implies long-term storage with no expectation of another immediate use"). To me it just didn't sound idiomatic to refer to "configuration" as being "held" and is not a usage I've ever really heard much.

> - ``conf.py`` contains the majority of the configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``conf.py`` contains the majority of the Sphinx configuration
```

Worth clarifying a touch?

> - ``contents.rst`` contains the table of contents directives for Sphinx

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``contents.rst`` lists the table of contents directives for Sphinx
```

Avoid repetition (assuming `lists` is appropriate; we can find another word if not

- ``pep_sphinx_extensions/pep_theme/theme.conf`` sets the Pygments themes

The configuration:

- registers the custom Sphinx extension
- sets both ``.txt`` and ``.rst`` suffixes to be parsed as PEPs
- tells Sphinx which source files to use
- registers the PEP theme, maths renderer, and template
- disables some default settings that are covered in the extension

> - sets the default and 'dark mode' code formatter styles

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- sets the default and "dark mode" code formatter styles
```

Maybe BrE is different (ignore if so), but at least in AmE style guides, `"` is the first level of quote nesting, while `'` is second level

Author: You are of course correct. Normally writing in LaTeX forces me to think about this, but I got sloppy. 

If it's of any interest the style manual I most often use is The Economist's -- might held be in your local library's collection (although I apprecaite an esoteric text for an American library), but an older edition (9th, 2005) can be found online at http://www.benjaminjameswaddell.com/wp-content/uploads/2018/08/the-economist-style-guide.pdf

A

Reviewer: Hmmm, interesting—I didn't realize they had one. Over here, AP style is the standard for press writing (aside from NYT's quaint and idiosyncratic style) and is nominally what I follow as a fallback to my Spyder documentation style guide (and those I've sourced it from) for general English, since it is what I'm used to from writing and copyediting the science mags I used to work for on the side, and is probably the most common of the established style guides on the web.

Author: The [Guardian style guide](https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-a) is also well established in the UK, I'm just pretentious..! (I am a student of economics, so clearly I picked the right newspaper's styles!).

I must actually read an edition of the NYT at some point, even more so if it is quaint and idiosyncratic!

A

2. Orchestration
----------------

``build.py`` acts to manage the rendering process.
Usage is covered in :doc:`build`.

3. Extension
------------

The Sphinx extension and theme are contained in the ``pep_sphinx_extensions``
directory.
The following is a brief overview of the stages of the PEP rendering process,
and how the extension functions at each point.

3.1 Extension setup

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
'''''''''''''''''''
```

The extension registers several objects:

- ``FileBuilder`` and ``DirectoryBuilder`` run the build process for file- and

>   directory- based building

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  directory-based building, respectively.
```

Fix punctuation/spacing and add respectively for explicitness.

- ``PEPParser`` registers the custom document transforms and parses PEPs to
  a Docutils document.

> - ``PEPTranslator`` converts a Docutils document into HTML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``PEPTranslator`` converts a Docutils document into HTML.
```

Add period for consistency and correctness

> - ``PEPRole`` handles ``:pep:`` roles in the reStructuredText source

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``PEPRole`` handles ``:pep:`` roles in the reStructuredText source.
```

Ditto

> It also patches default behaviour:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The extension also patches default behaviour:
```

At first I was uncertain what "it" referred to, since we are many lines away from where it was defined.

- updating the default settings
- updating the Docutils inliner
- using HTML maths display over MathJax

3.2 Builder initialised

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
'''''''''''''''''''''''
```

After the Sphinx builder object is created and initialised, we ensure the
configuration is correct for the builder chosen.

> Currently this involves updating the relative link template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, this involves updating the relative link template.
```

Missing comma

Reviewer: ?

See ``_update_config_for_builder`` in ``pep_sphinx_extensions/__init__.py``.

3.3 Before documents are read

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
```

> ``create_pep_zero`` hook is called. See `4. PEP 0 generation`_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``create_pep_zero`` hook is called. See `5. PEP 0`_.
```

Fix the link to point to the (presumably renamed) section, as well as grammar

3.4 Read document

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
'''''''''''''''''
```

Parsing the document is handled by ``PEPParser``

> (``pep_sphinx_extensions.pep_processor.parsing.pep_parser.PEPParser``), a light
> wrapper over ``sphinx.parsers.RSTParser``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(``pep_sphinx_extensions.pep_processor.parsing.pep_parser.PEPParser``),
a lightweight wrapper over ``sphinx.parsers.RSTParser``.
```

It took me a second to parse this, since "lightweight" is the more idiomatic and conventionally-used word in this specific context

> ``PEPParser`` serves two purposes, firstly to mark the document as containing
> :rfc:`2822` headers, and secondly to register the transforms we want to apply.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``PEPParser`` serves two purposes; firstly, to mark the document as containing
:rfc:`2822` headers; and secondly, to register the transforms we want to apply.
```

Punctuation

These are:

- ``PEPHeaders``
- ``PEPTitle``
- ``PEPContents``
- ``PEPFooter``

Transforms are then applied in priority order.

3.4.1 ``PEPRole`` role
**********************

This overrides the built-in ``:pep:`` role to return the correct URL.

3.4.2 ``PEPHeaders`` transform
******************************

PEPs start with a set of :rfc:`2822` headers, per :doc:`PEP 1 <../pep-0001>`.
This transform validates that the required headers are present and of the
correct data type, and removes headers not for display.
It must run before the ``PEPTitle`` transform.

3.4.3 ``PEPTitle`` transform
****************************

We generate the title node from the parsed title in the PEP headers, and make
all nodes in the document children of the new title node.
This transform must also handle parsing reStructuredText markup within PEP
titles, such as :doc:`PEP 604 <../pep-0604>`.

3.4.4 ``PEPContents`` transform
*******************************

> The automatic table of contents (TOC) is inserted in this transform in a two
> part process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The automatic table of contents (TOC) is inserted in this transform in a
two-part process.
```

Punctuation

> Firstly the transform inserts a placeholder for the TOC and a horizontal rule

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Firstly, the transform inserts a placeholder for the TOC and a horizontal rule
```

Missing comma

Usage of "firstly", "secondly", is [discouraged](https://www.merriam-webster.com/words-at-play/first-or-firstly) per the opinion of many dictionaries and style guides, and can sound rather pretentious, overcomplicated, distracting or even incorrect to to many readers over the shorter, simpler and more correct "First", "Second", etc,, but its ambiguous enough that I left it for now.

Author: Agree on `(ordinal)ly`, thanks for picking it up

after the document title and PEP headers.
Secondly, a callback transform recursively walks the document to create the TOC,
starting from after the placeholder node.

> Whilst walking the document all reference nodes in the titles are removed, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whilst walking the document, all reference nodes in the titles are removed, and
```
Missing comma

While its idiomatic BrE, be aware that use of whilst (especially repeated) can sometimes sound pretentious and more difficult to parse for AmE speakers

Author: Interesting on "whilst" -- I find it a very useful word in quite a few contexts! What would the American equivalent be?

A

Reviewer: "While" would be the equivalent in American English, i.e. you'd say "While walking the document." I thought it was more of a AmE/BrE distinction, but it seems [Cambridge Dictionary disagrees](https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/grammar/british-grammar/while-and-whilst), implying that "while" is (now?) generally preferred over "whilst" for both and there is less of a distinction between the two, just like "firstly" always was.

> While is much more common than whilst, and whilst sounds more formal:
>
>  >   Would you like something to eat while we’re waiting? (less common: … whilst we’re waiting?) (during the time we’re waiting)
>
> >    British English prefers an ‘s’ for words like realise, organise and industrialise, while American English prefers ‘z’ (realize, organize, industrialize). (less common: … whilst American English prefers ‘z’ …) (expressing a contrast between British and American English)

titles are given a self-link.

3.4.5 ``PEPFooter`` transform
*****************************

> This firstly builds a map of file modification times from a single git call, as
> a speed-up. This will return incorrect results on a shallow check-out of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This firstly builds a map of file modification times from a single git call, as
a speed-up. This will return incorrect results on a shallow checkout of the
```

"checkout" (no dash) is the noun, and the correct git term. "check out" (space, no dash) is the verb

repository, as is the default on continuous integration systems.

We then attempt to remove any empty references sections, and append metadata in
the footer (source link and last modified timestamp).

3.5 Prepare for writing

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
''''''''''''''''''''''''
```

``pep_html_builder.FileBuilder.prepare_writing`` initialises the bare miniumum
of the Docutils writer and the settings for writing documents.

> This provides a significant speed-up over the base Sphinx implementation as most

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This provides a significant speed-up over the base Sphinx implementation, as most
```

Missing comma

of the data automatically initialised was unused.

3.6 Translate Docutils to HTML

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
```

``PEPTranslator`` overrides paragraph and reference logic to replicate

> processing from the previous ``docutils.writers.pep`` based system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
processing from the previous ``docutils.writers.pep``-based system.
```

Punctuation

> Paragraphs are to be made compact where possible by omitting <p> tags, and
> footnote references should be enclosed in square brackets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paragraphs are made compact where possible by omitting ``<p>`` tags, and
footnote references are be enclosed in square brackets.
```

Simplify and correct grammar/phrasing, and use verbatim on `<p>`; this describes what the translator actually does, not just what it is planned to do.

> 3.7 Prepare for export to Jinja2
> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3.7 Prepare for export to Jinja
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''
```

As of Jinja 3, per [the docs](https://jinja.palletsprojects.com/en/3.0.x/), `Jinja` is the canonical name of the templating system.

> Finally in ``pep_html_builder``, we gather all the parts to be passed to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, in ``pep_html_builder``, we gather all the parts to be passed to the
```

Missing comma (a little arguable tho)

> Jinja2 template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Jinja template.
```

See above

This is also where we create the sidebar table of contents.

The HTML files are then written out to the build directory.

> 3. Theme

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Theme
```

Typo

--------

The theme is comprised of the HTML template in
``pep_sphinx_extensions/pep_theme/templates/page.html`` and the stylesheets in
``pep_sphinx_extensions/pep_theme/static``.

The template is entirely self-contained, not relying on any default behaviour
from Sphinx.
It specifies the CSS files to include, the favicon, and basic semantic

> information for document structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
information for the document structure.
```

Missing a definite article

> The stylesheets are in two parts, with ``style.css`` defining the meat of the
> layout, and ``mq.css`` defining media-queries for a responsive layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The stylesheet is split into two parts, with ``style.css`` defining the meat
of the layout, and ``mq.css`` adding media queries for a responsive design.
```

Fixed grammar/plural agreement issue (if you don't like that wording, I can offer others that also fix the problem). Also, corrected punctuation and multiple repetition issues.

Author: I've suggested an alternate, although it uses a two element list

A

Reviewer: I see; I had one small suggested tweak on that but otherwise looks great :+1: 

(FYI, to make it easier on reviewers, you can stick your suggestions here too and even apply them, if you like—though on the other hand, that can be extra work for you)

Author: > (FYI, to make it easier on reviewers, you can stick your suggestions here too and even apply them, if you like—though on the other hand, that can be extra work for you)

Ahh, I was trying to avoid 5,000 commits by clicking the "commit suggestion" button for each change. Will keep in mind.

> 5. \PEP 0
> ---------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. PEP 0
--------
```

Typo? Or is there a reason for this (e.g. to avoid a link target conflict)?

Author: The Docutils inliner (source of several of my problems) converts it into a link without the leading backslash. It could appear anywhere in the word, but before the `PEP` is the convention (see 394, 426, 440, etc)

A

Reviewer: Huh, strange. Is there a reason it does it here but not elsewhere? Bad heuristics with the number?

Author: It will do it everywhere in the PEPs repo (see #2209 to make these explicit). This is standard behaviour but disabled by default -- the `pep2html` script explicitly enables it, and so previous PEPs may have been written expecting the behaviour. You won't see it in other repos &c. unless explicitly turned on, perhaps why it's not been very obvious.

https://github.com/python/peps/blob/f5a820919ad3ae4d79e2ffb28935ff1ec484d504/pep2html.py#L486

A

> PEP 0 generation happens in three phases.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The generation of the index, PEP 0, happens in three phases.
```

Be a little clearer and more explicit

> Firstly, the text file itself is generated, it is added to Sphinx, and the data
> is post processed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, the reST source file is generated; second, it is added to Sphinx;
and finally, the data is post processed.
```

Clarify what "the text file" means, fix punctuation and use parallel phrasing

5.1 File creation

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
'''''''''''''''''
```

> ``pep-0000.rst`` is created during a callback before documents are loaded by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``pep-0000.rst`` is created during a callback, before documents are loaded by
```

Missing comma

Sphinx.

Firstly, we parse the individual PEP files, getting the

> RFC2822 header, and parsing and then validating that metadata.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:rfc:`2822` header, and parsing and then validating that metadata.
```

Link it directly and use the canonical formatting (space between RFC and the number, just like with PEPs)

> After collecting and validating all the PEP data, the creation of the index
> itself is in three steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After collecting and validating all the PEP data, the index itself is
is created in three steps:
```

Avoid passive voice and extra syntactic complexity; clearer, simpler and more direct

>     1. Output header text.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    1. Output the header text
```

Consistent phrasing and punctuation

    2. Output the category and numerical indices
    3. Output the author index

The ``AUTHOR_OVERRIDES.csv`` file can be used to override an author's name in
the PEP 0 output.

We then add the newly created PEP 0 file to two Sphinx variables so that it will

> be processed as a normal file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be processed as a normal source document.
```

Avoid repetition and be more explicit

5.2 Post processing

> ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Reviewer: ```suggestion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
'''''''''''''''''''
```

> The ``PEPHeaders`` transform schedules the \PEP 0 post-processing code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``PEPHeaders`` transform schedules the PEP 0 post-processing code.
```

Another typo, or is there a reason? I don't see it written like this anywhere else...

> This serves two functions, masking email addresses and linking numeric
> references to PEPs to the actual documents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This serves two functions: masking email addresses and linking numeric
PEP references to the actual documents.
```

Fix punctuation and avoid awkward and confusing double "to"

This provides a significant speed-up over the base Sphinx implementation, as
most of the data automatically initialised was unused.

3.6 Translate Docutils to HTML
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

``PEPTranslator`` overrides paragraph and reference logic to replicate
processing from the previous ``docutils.writers.pep``-based system.
Paragraphs are made compact where possible by omitting ``<p>`` tags, and
footnote references are be enclosed in square brackets.

3.7 Prepare for export to Jinja
'''''''''''''''''''''''''''''''

Finally in ``pep_html_builder``, we gather all the parts to be passed to the
Jinja template.
This is also where we create the sidebar table of contents.

The HTML files are then written out to the build directory.

4. Theme
--------

The theme is comprised of the HTML template in
``pep_sphinx_extensions/pep_theme/templates/page.html`` and the stylesheets in
``pep_sphinx_extensions/pep_theme/static``.

The template is entirely self-contained, not relying on any default behaviour
from Sphinx.
It specifies the CSS files to include, the favicon, and basic semantic
information for the document structure.

The styles are defined in two parts:

> - ``style.css`` does the meat of the layout

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``style.css`` handles the meat of the layout
```

"does" is rather casual and non-specific here...otherwise, this looks good
